Good morning everybody.
Welcome to church.
All you guys in the room and online.
We're so glad that you're here.
He chose to spend church.
Making a priority to be here.
We're going to sing to our God who deserves our praise.
Can we stand to our feet and give Him glory?
We give you our praise.
We give you this time.
We declare in these songs that we trust you, that we believe deeply that you are in control.
But you call us to love people as you love people and see people as you see people.
So give us the eyes to do that.
Help us to respond to the way you love us by loving others.
the same.
You're not done.
Teach us something new in this message so that we can be more like you when we leave here in a world that so desperately needs you, Jesus.
Thank you for this time.
Thank you for these people, I pray in Jesus' name.
Amen.
My friends, good to be with you.
Good to worship with you.
You can take a seat.
Well, hey everyone and welcome to Eagle Brook Online.
My name is Jeff Dodge.
I'm the online campus pastor.
And earlier this week, I decided what I wanted to talk about this weekend.
And then just a couple of days later, I was reading my Bible and I felt like this passage leapt off the page.
And so I want to share it with you today.
It's from the Apostle Paul's writings in the book of Colossians chapter two, beginning in verse nine.
It talks about Jesus and how the fullness of God dwells in him, which is Bible speak for Jesus is God and how we have been filled in him through faith.
It says this rather odd statement that in Christ we have been circumcised without hands.
If you don't know what circumcision is, go ask your parents.
But why this phrase is important was because under the Old Covenant, circumcision was the way that people entered into an agreement with God.
It was what set God's people apart.
It was the way that God marked
His people.
And what Paul is saying here is that today, the way that we set ourselves apart, the way that we are mark ourselves as children of God is through faith in Jesus.
And that is how we enter into covenant with God.
And then it goes on to say that we are buried with Christ in baptism.
And then we're raised to a new life through faith in Jesus.
Essentially saying that after entering into covenant with God through faith in Jesus,
Our very next step is to be buried with him
in baptism, symbolically demonstrating that the sin that once controlled us has no claim to us now, that we've died to it, and that through faith, we are made new creations set apart and marked as God's people.
Here and in many other places in Scripture, it is very clear.
If you've put your faith in Jesus, then it's time to be baptized.
Maybe you've just recently made that decision, or maybe you've been a believer for a long time but haven't yet taken this step.
Don't let any more time pass.
We are doing baptisms at all of our campuses on the weekend of February 7th and 8th.
To find your nearest campus and to register, head to eaglebrookchurch.com slash baptism.
And you might notice that we don't have an online option for winter baptism.
In years past, virtually no one would sign up.
And now we put our heads together and we realized that it's almost like people don't like to travel to Minnesota in the dead of winter.
And so we thought,
Where do people like to travel?
The answer is Florida.
Okay, now we're gonna do online baptisms there.
Seriously, we have multiple viewing groups in Southwest Florida, and we're gonna be attending two of them on Sunday, February 8th, and then going to the ocean to baptize as many people as we can.
If you're visiting or if you live in that area and you wanna join us for a service or to get baptized somewhere a little bit more tropical, let us know by emailing me at online at eaglebrookchurch.com.
And as you're doing that, I'm gonna hand it back to the band.
So good.
Today, before I jump into the message, I want to talk a little bit about some of the events in our world.
It seems like every weekend there's something in the national news that's happening in Minneapolis.
Almost every weekend I get a text message from a friend, you know, someplace in Texas or California saying, oh my goodness, what's going on in Minnesota?
It's going on in Minneapolis.
And you probably have opinions as to why that is, and I have opinions as to why that is, but here's a verse from the Bible that God has been bringing me to this week.
It's from Ephesians chapter six, verse 12, for our struggle is not against flesh and blood.
Our struggle is not against people.
We tend to think it is.
We tend to think it's politicians, people on the other side, people who just don't understand.
We think the battle is primarily against people, but here's what he says, really our struggle.
is against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world, and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
That there is a spiritual battle taking place.
And we can't see that spiritual battle with our physical eyes.
I can't see that battle.
You can't see that battle.
But we see the effects of that battle.
And so over the course of the last week or so, as I've been reading this verse and reflecting on it, I become convinced there is a spiritual battle.
over the city of Minneapolis.
And as followers of Christ, I would love to show you this verse in Second Chronicles and call you to this.
He says, if my people who are called by my name, that's us, will humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then he says, I will hear from heaven and I will forgive their sin and I will heal their land.
Does our land need to be healed?
Yes, our land needs to be healed.
I wanna invite you as a church this week, every day this week at 714, the verse we just read, 2 Chronicles 714, at 714 every day, set an alarm on your phone to be praying that God would heal our land.
Now the question some of you are wondering is AM or PM?
And I'm just gonna let you decide, okay?
Depending on your lifestyle and how you live your life, you can choose.
But at 714, to set an alarm on your phone and to say, God, would you heal our land?
Humble ourselves and come before him and pray and seek his face and say, God, would you heal our city?
Kyle Eidelman who's spoken at our church before is that he's a pastor at a church in Kentucky.
He sent me this early in the week.
He sent me this on Monday.
And this is the elders from his church and they're down praying and they're praying for us.
sent me a text and said, we were praying for Eaglebrook Church that you would be a light, that you would be full of God's truth and full of God's grace, that you'd be full of His mercy and His justice, and they were praying for God to heal our land and our state and our city.
And so I wanna join them.
Let's take a moment, let's pray, and let's ask God to do just that.
Lord, right now in this moment,
we humble ourselves before you.
We turn from the news and everything that we are bombarded with every day, God, and we turn our face to you and we seek you in this moment.
And God, we ask in the name of Jesus that you would heal our land, that you would heal our city.
God, I pray for victory over the spiritual battle that takes place, the spiritual battle in the heavenly realms.
I pray for victory right now over the powers, principalities and rulers of this dark world.
And we pray it in Jesus' name.
All right, today we are gonna continue on in our series.
We've been in for the last several weeks called Cabin Fever.
This is actually the last week of this series.
It's been all about relationships.
And I wanna start today with a joke that I heard recently
It was about a husband and a wife and the husband had a rare disease.
And the doctor wasn't sure he was gonna make it.
And so the doctor pulled the wife into the hallway.
He said, I'm gonna kind of break this to you first.
Then you can go break the news to your husband.
So he said to her, he said, your husband has this rare disease.
I don't think he's gonna make it.
But if he is gonna make it, he needs to live a life with no stress.
So he needs to wake up in the morning to a hot meal prepared by you.
He needs to have the house spotless.
He needs a life conducive to rest.
So don't ask him to do chores.
Don't upset him in any way.
He needs you to be pleasant at all times.
So don't bring your problems.
Don't bring your emotions.
He said, if you can do that, I think there's a chance that your husband could live.
A wife went back into the husband's hospital room.
He was obviously anxious to hear what the doctor had said.
He said, what did the doctor say?
She looked at him and she said, he said, you're going to die.
Wouldn't we love a marriage where there's no stress?
I mean, it's just a hot meal every day and the house is spotless, no problems, no emotions, no annoyances, no frustrations.
If you are waiting for that in your relationships, you are gonna be waiting until heaven.
When I used to do weddings, I would look at the soon to be husband and the soon to be wife, and I would say, when you take one sinful person,
and you marry them to another sinful person, you don't get less sin.
Amazing how that ends up working out.
But part of the problem that marriages today face is with our expectations.
We have been told this other person is gonna complete you.
This other person, they're gonna meet all of your needs and they're always gonna buy you the perfect Christmas gift, just like they do on the Hallmark movies.
Here's the reality, marriage is hard.
We don't hear that enough, but it is.
Anybody can fall in love.
All you need for that is a pulse.
But what's never been more difficult is to stay in love.
In fact, sometimes you'll hear people today and they'll say, you know, we fell out of love.
And when I hear people say that, I notice that they're treating love as if it's a noun and not a verb.
I fell out of love.
Well, what's the thing I fell out of?
Well, the thing, the noun is love.
But love isn't a noun, love is a verb.
If you said to me, I fell out of my truck, I'd say, well, why don't you climb back up in your truck again?
And that's what I want to say to some of us today in your marriage.
What if you fell back in love again?
What if you climbed back up in your marriage again?
And I don't say that flippantly because I know some of you are like, Hey, you don't know my situation.
You don't know what I've been through.
You don't know what he or she did to me.
And you're right.
I don't know your situation, but I do know your God.
He's a God of hope and he's a God of healing and he's a God of restoration and he is a God of miracles.
Here's what the Bible says about marriage and Ephesians chapter five.
It says husbands,
Love your wives just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her.
Love is a willingness to sacrifice, it's a willingness to sacrifice what we want for the sake of what another person needs.
Some of us can't even imagine what that would be like, can we?
You might sleep two feet apart at night, but it feels like there is a two mile gap.
This is between the two of you right now.
You can't even imagine feeling loved by that person again.
You can't imagine loving that person again.
I wanna take you to Revelation chapter two.
And this is a verse, it's not specifically about marriage, but I think it has a lot of application to marriage.
Jesus is speaking directly here to the church in Ephesus.
And he compliments them in all kinds of different ways and says, here's some great things you're doing.
But then he says this, he says, yet I hold this against you.
You have forsaken the love you had at first.
Consider how far you have fallen.
Repent and do the things you did at first.
Jesus is talking about a time in our life when you loved God more than you do today.
And maybe you can think of a time like that where you're like, yeah, I loved God more when I was in college or I loved God more several years ago than I do today.
And if that's you, Jesus' message to you is to repent and do the things you did at first.
Repent, which means turn around, acknowledge where you're at, go in the other direction.
And then he says, do the things you did at first.
So if you loved God more when you were a part of a small group and people were encouraging you in your faith, get into a small group again.
If you felt like you loved God more when you were sharing your faith and you were around non-believers, well, then start doing that again.
Do the things you did at first.
Think about how this applies to our marriages.
When we first start dating, oftentimes you write these, you know, just sweet notes.
You're just my little ooby booby tooby wooshy.
You know, you're just these little sweet notes.
You'd play on these creative dates.
You would pour time and energy into that relationship.
You would drive an hour to spend a half hour with that person and then drive an hour back home.
I'm not necessarily saying you do that again.
But what if you did the things you did at first?
What if you wrote an encouraging note, planned a creative date, spent some quality time with one another?
Whenever I talk to couples about this, the pushback that I'll get is, well, I don't feel that way anymore.
You know, I felt that way then, that's why I did those things, but now I don't feel that way anymore.
Notice that the verse doesn't say, repent if you feel like it.
It doesn't say, when you start feeling like it, well then maybe you should do the things you did at first.
He simply says repent and do the things you did at first.
Your feelings will often follow.
You start pouring time and energy and effort into your relationship with God, often your feelings will follow.
You start pouring time and energy and effort into your marriage, and often your feelings will follow.
Maybe you're here today and you're happily married, kind of.
But there's just something in your marriage where you go, hey, I'm a little bit unfulfilled.
I feel a little bit unhappy in marriage.
My wife Sarah and I sat down last Sunday night, and we had a really good conversation.
about some of the areas in our marriage where we felt unhappy and we felt unfulfilled.
And that's just it.
Some people think, well, all these other marriages are doing so great.
My marriage is struggling.
That is simply not true.
Every single marriage, every single relationship goes through natural ups and downs.
If you ask me, how is your marriage doing?
Depends on the day.
Yesterday not great.
Today we're doing awesome.
Last week was a little bit rough.
This week is really, really good.
Every relationship has natural ups and downs.
So the question is this, how do you go the long haul, even with all the natural ups and downs that relationships and marriages have?
The first way is this, eliminate the D word.
It is a study at the University of Chicago where they ask couples a really simple question.
How happy are you in your marriage?
And maybe you wanna even answer that question in your mind right now.
Am I happily married?
Am I unhappily married?
Here was the interesting part of the study.
They found that of those who said they were unhappy in their marriage, they traced them for five years.
They stuck with them for five years.
They asked them the same question five years later.
And for those that stayed married and worked through those issues, over two thirds of them were now in the very happily married category.
Five years.
All they had to do was push through those issues, work through those problems, and they went in five years from saying, I am unhappy in my marriage, to I am extremely happy in my marriage.
What if that could be you?
Here's a phrase I hope that you will remember.
Our marriage will be as good as we decide it will be.
You decide.
You can spend money on a counselor, or you can spend money on a boat, but you decide.
You can scroll on TikTok or you can read a book about marriage but you decide.
You can keep a record of wrongs and store up bitterness in your heart or you can forgive but you decide.
You can pray for your marriage or you can not pray for your marriage but you decide.
Now, when I say you decide, here's the scenario that's so tricky about that.
Some of you might say, hey, I want to.
I wanna work on our marriage.
I wanna go to church.
I wanna pray about our marriage.
I wanna go see a counselor.
I wanna read the book.
They don't.
My husband refuses.
My wife refuses.
They won't.
How do you grow in a happy, healthy marriage with someone who doesn't want to work on the marriage?
This is one of the scenarios that I see Satan use more than almost any other.
And this is a bit of a generalization, but this is just from my own experience.
Oftentimes it's the wife who says, I wanna go to counseling, I wanna go to church, I wanna pray about our marriage.
And for whatever reason, the husband kind of drags his feet.
And he's busy and he's got other things going on and he just doesn't wanna do it.
Maybe there's some pride involved, but there's just something in him that's like, I don't wanna do that.
And then all of a sudden she just kind of snaps and she goes, that's it, I'm done.
That's it.
And you know what the husband does at that point?
I'll go to church, I'll pray, I'll go to counseling, I'll do whatever you want.
But at that point, she's already made the decision.
I see Satan use that situation to destroy more marriages than almost any other.
What do you do if you are married to a non-believer?
Cause some of you might be in that situation where you're like, I came to church, they didn't, I bring the kids, they don't come.
The Bible speaks directly to that situation.
1 Peter chapter three, here's what it says.
Your husband does, if your husband does not believe the word, okay, so he doesn't believe the word, not a follower of Christ, they may be won over without words by the behavior of their wives when they see the purity and reverence of your lives.
What he's saying is if you're in that situation, words aren't going to be often your best strategy.
The words of like nagging, like, why don't you be more of a spiritual leader?
Why don't you do more of these things?
Probably isn't your best approach.
Your best approach is to live a godly life.
And they would see that godly life and they would be drawn to it.
Now I wanna point out, this is a principle, not a promise.
It's not 100% guaranteed that if you live a godly life that your spouse is gonna see that and go, you know what, I really want that in my life.
But it's probably the best bet.
If I could speak to the husband or wife who doesn't want to go to counseling, who doesn't want to work on the marriage, that when my wife or I first got married, we went to see a counselor a couple of years in, and I was the one who didn't want to go.
And here was my argument to my wife.
I'm like, we don't need to go to counseling.
What, they got a degree?
They got a four year degree, read some books, got a little diploma on the wall.
They're just a person.
We've got wisdom.
We can figure this out on our own.
We don't need to go see a counselor.
And maybe there was a little pride involved, because when I went in, I was kind of like, oh, no one sees me here.
But I'm so glad that we did.
I grew from that.
Our marriage grew from that.
If you're here today and you're resisting, I would urge you to take that step for your sake, for your marriage's sake, for your kids and the marriage that they watch and see every single day.
For your legacy of your life and with your family and with your grandchildren, take that step.
I know spouses who their spouse comes to them and says, hey, you need to stop drinking.
You stop abusing the substance.
They won't do it.
And I'm like, it's a liquid.
It's a beverage.
It doesn't love you.
It's trick the chemicals of your brain to make you think, I need this.
I can't function without it.
Your marriage needs you.
Do whatever it takes, go to treatment, do whatever it takes.
Here's what I've noticed happens in a lot of marriages.
We get married to someone and at first, when we're dating or when we're first married, we love everything about him.
I mean, just go ask a young couple, what do you like?
Oh, he's perfect.
She's perfect.
100% love everything about him.
Six months into marriage, a year into marriage, certainly by five years into marriage, you're like 80%.
I love 80% of them.
But there's 20% of what you want in that marriage and in that relationship that's missing.
80% of what you love, 20% of what you want is missing.
And over the years, we start to long for that 20%.
So we start to think things like, I wish he was more thoughtful.
And I wish he was more fun and adventurous.
You know, I'm kind of losing that in myself.
And I wish he was more of a spiritual leader.
And then you meet someone in the neighborhood, at work, in your friend group,
and they have the 20%.
And you're so drawn to that 20%, you chase that 20%.
And all of a sudden, either emotionally or physically, you start drifting from your marriage into this other relationship.
And at first you're like, oh, this is fantastic.
This is what I've been wanting.
This is what I've wanted for so many years.
I love 100% about this person until six months in, until a year in, certainly five years in.
And all of a sudden you're like, oh, 80%.
It's 20% that's missing.
It's actually a different 20% than the 20% you were missing before, but it's still 20%.
Stop chasing the elusive 20%.
There is not a person who has ever walked on this planet outside of Jesus Christ who's going to give you 100% of what you need.
Jesus Christ is the only one who can meet 100% of your needs.
One of the smartest decisions that Sarah and I made when we first got married was we said this, we are not going to utter the D word.
That means if we're in a fight, I'm not gonna threaten like, well, just divorce me then, or fine, that's how I feel.
Let's just get a divorce.
We don't use that word.
It's off the table.
Here's what that means.
That means I'm either happily married or I'm unhappily married.
Those are my two choices.
It's amazing how motivated you are to work on your marriage when those are your two choices.
And maybe you're here today and you've been through a divorce.
And I'm always sensitive when we talk about this, because I know there's some shame in that.
I don't want you to feel that at all.
I want you to know our church loves you.
We have a ministry called divorce care.
I was just talking to a woman a couple of weeks ago who was a part of this.
She said, it's helping me so much to be around other people who've gone through that situation and walked through that situation.
We love you.
We want to walk with you through that time of your life.
Here's the second way that you can overcome and have a marriage for the long haul.
It says, commit to working on your own stuff.
This doesn't just apply to marriages.
This applies to any relationship, dating relationship, friend relationship.
Here's why.
Healthy relationships are made of healthy people.
If you're in a relationship right now, it's not a healthy relationship.
You're 50% of that.
It's either you, it's them, or it's both of you.
But healthy relationships are made up of what?
They are made up of healthy people.
In Colossians chapter three, here's what Paul says.
He says, get rid of sexual sin, impurity and lust.
Do you know how many relationships have been ruined because of sexual sin?
And we do, we just sort of watch it on TV shows and movies and it's just no big deal.
It's like, oh, everybody's kind of hooking up.
It's great.
And no harm, you know, no foul, no consequence.
I can't tell you in real life, when you step into real people's lives and you're just watching on a screen from Hollywood or a script, how many times sexual sin ruins relationships?
He said, get rid of it.
Get rid of greed.
Get rid of anger, rage and filthy language.
Do you know how many relationships have been ruined because of rage and anger?
How many relationships have been destroyed because of someone's anger?
You may say, well, it's not my stuff.
It's his, it's hers, it's their sexual sin, it's their anger.
I wanna show you a clip from author Sheila Walsh.
Her and her husband were going through a difficult time.
They were gonna go see a counselor, take a look at what she says.
I was just thinking, Barry and I have been married for 31 years this year.
But a few years back, we went to a really, a really difficult place where I didn't think we were going to survive.
And I didn't want to survive.
Because I felt like, you know what, this is too much.
And he asked if I would be willing to go to counseling.
And I'm like, well, I'll go if you want.
The time I got in there, Barry had already been there.
And he was in literally floods of tears.
I could tell he was really broken.
And the counselor asked him how he was doing.
And he said, I'm not doing great.
I've made some mistakes again that I promised I never would.
And they said to me, and how are you doing?
And I'm like, well, you know what?
I'm just moving on.
And then the counselor said to me, OK, let me tell you something.
I have a friend.
And when I asked my friend, who is your favorite person on this earth?
And my friend said, my Taylor.
And he said,
Why is your tailor your favorite person?
He said, because every time I go to him, he takes fresh measurements.
I'm never what I was in this man, this godly kind man.
Looked me nice at Sheila.
Could you take fresh measurements?
Oh, gosh.
And I said, I can't take it.
Oh, yeah.
Well done.
It's always.
And I said, yes, I could.
We done.
Because it's like,
The Holy Spirit gets us.
I mean, He knows.
I mean, I was not in a good place.
I was mad.
I was angry.
I was hurt.
I was disappointed.
And all I wanted was for Him to know that.
But when you say, when you invite the Holy Spirit into that dialogue, if you know what, if I couldn't with myself, we're in trouble here.
And He kindly comes with you, you know?
Could you take new measurements today?
You might have a record of wrongs and bitterness in your heart that's been stored up for years, but could you take fresh measurements?
Could you invite the Holy Spirit into your marriage?
It's worth noting that her husband seems like he had repented and taken responsibility, and you might be in a different situation, and that is a different situation.
And in those situations, there might be some boundaries that need to be set up.
That might be the most loving thing you can do, but even then,
You can invite the Holy Spirit into your marriage.
Here's the third way to go the long haul.
I'm gonna give to my spouse even if they don't do the same for me.
I wanna show you this in the Bible, because it's a principle all of our scripture.
Romans 5 verse eight says, while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
Before we had done anything, he made the first move.
Here's what it says in Ephesians.
Husbands love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and what?
He gave up his life for her.
Jesus didn't wait for the church to make the first move.
We didn't take the initiative.
He took the initiative.
He went first.
I've told this story before, but several years ago, about 10 years ago, Sarah and I were on a date with each other.
We were getting some ice cream at Sebastian Joe's.
And there was this really long line.
It was kind of out the door.
It was a beautiful summer night.
And so we got up to the front and we knew what we were gonna order.
I was gonna order raspberry chocolate chip, which is the best.
And Sarah was gonna offer, or get coffee ice cream, but they didn't have coffee ice cream.
So we got up to the front and I'm like, I'll have raspberry chocolate chips.
She said, I'll have coffee, ice cream.
They said, oh, we're out of coffee.
And now Sarah's flustered.
She doesn't know what she wants.
So she takes a sample of the basil vanilla.
She takes a sample of the maple nut.
She takes a sample of the honey cinnamon crisp.
And I'm looking at the line of people behind us.
And this is my issue.
Okay.
I'm not throwing her under the bus.
I'm saying this is my issue.
I care way too much what other people think.
But I wanted them all to know I don't approve of all this crazy sampling that's going on here.
Okay.
This isn't me.
It's her.
And I wanted them all to know that.
And so when her back was turned to me or so I thought, I kind of went like this, like to the line, just performatively to let them know it's not me.
Right as I did that, Sarah turned to ask me a question.
So she saw me kind of go like that.
She turns, she goes, I'll take that.
First one, salty caramel.
She didn't like salty caramel.
I know that because she told me several times that night that she didn't like salty caramel.
And so we went outside.
We'd been married for 10 years or 14 years at the time.
We've been married 24 years now.
And it's supposed to be this really beautiful night.
We got ice cream.
We're sitting with each other.
No kids.
And we are so ticked.
I'm so frustrated that she took all that time.
I was embarrassed.
She's so mad at me for being rude and showing her up in front of all these other people.
We are so ticked at each other.
I'm just trying to wolf down my ice cream so I can get home.
And I wish I could tell you that we worked it out really quickly.
But when we got home, I was sitting on the couch and she came and sat next to me and she said, I don't like salty caramel.
But this time she had a smile on her face.
And we worked it out and we reconciled.
but I realized afterwards that I had never apologized.
I didn't take the first step.
I didn't say, hey, I was so rude back there.
I should not have done that.
She loved me first.
She went anyway.
What if you didn't wait for your spouse to start loving you?
You just love them.
What if you didn't wait for them to start putting time and energy and effort into the relationship?
What if you just started putting time and energy into the relationship?
What if you went first?
I had a tight chance to sit down with two couples that have been married for a long time and who I look up to and respect.
These are the kind of couples that their marriage is the kind of marriage you're going, yeah, that's the kind of marriage I want someday.
And so I sat down and had a chance to talk with them about this.
I think you're going to enjoy their wisdom.
Take a look.
Well, thank you guys for your time.
I really appreciate this to hear some wisdom about marriage.
And I just think it's so important for couples in our church to hear what does it take to be married over the long haul.
And so, we'd love for you guys to introduce yourselves and then to tell us how long you've been married.
Byron Emmert and my wife, Linda.
And how long have we been married?
Long time.
Going on 49.
49 years.
Phenomenal.
Yeah, Jim and Jen Johnson and we've been married 31 years.
What I love about this conversation is I think for so many couples in our church, they're in marriage right now, and it's difficult.
And they look at you and go, how did you make it 49 years?
How did you make it 31 years?
What have you done to have an enduring marriage, a healthy marriage over the years?
What are some of the things that you guys have built into your relationship?
I've said this for years.
The hardest job you sign up for is marriage.
And someone told us years ago, base it around prayer.
I know that sounds like the simple church answer, but
when we've had struggles or challenges or even in the good times, going back to that and just saying, all right, we gotta bring this to the Lord in prayer.
When we take time away from our schedule and just pray together out loud to the Lord, I just feel like it really, God changes our hearts, changes my heart sometimes, changes Jim's heart sometimes.
I don't know who came up with it, but the triangle illustration really made a difference in our marriage.
If this is me and here's Linda,
And here's Jesus.
If every day, if my purpose is to grow closer to Jesus and Linda's is the same, well, then naturally we grow closer to each other.
And if one of us veers off, you notice it in our marriage.
In fact, I've been convinced that intimacy in marriage will be proportionate to our intimacy with Christ.
What are some of the habits or practices that have helped you guys communicate well with each other?
Making sure we have a touch point every day that we just ask each other how we're doing, how our heart is, and praying together too has always been really helpful and good.
Well, I know we've talked about listening, listening well, right?
So, I mean, actively listening.
So you're asking questions as you're listening and just following up with the person.
So not just talking about your day, but asking about theirs.
Just pursuing that listenership, if you will, because so often we talk about practicing communication, but it's really an art form to listen to each other.
What do you guys do to keep pursuing each other over time?
Yeah, I think making sure that it's calendared out.
I mean, whether you get into a rhythm, some couples are able to do it weekly, some monthly, some maybe not.
that often, but from day one said, how do we schedule out time throughout the week and throughout the month and throughout the year for each other?
Someone told us and we're so thankful that they did make this, after your relationship with Jesus, the first priority.
And your kids see that.
They noticed that, and they see that for their own life.
Yeah, and someday when your kids are gone, you still want to like each other, right?
Yes.
And hang out with each other, so we should be working on that relationship first, so.
How do you guys navigate disagreement or disappointment?
You know, you have something that you disagree about, or you're really just discouraged about it in your marriage?
Like, talk through how do you guys work to navigate through that?
We did have pre-marriage counseling, and so she was amazing.
The first thing she said to us was,
don't blame the other person.
Instead of saying, you always do this, or you never do this, or you're driving me crazy, you say, when you do this, it makes me feel.
This is how I feel.
And so those feelings are legitimate.
And so to express your feelings to each other, and then just reciprocating and listening to each other through that sharing time too.
If part of your story right now is that you're in the middle of a real struggle with your spouse or even separated,
to really turn to the Lord yourself and to start with yourself and just go, am I being the person that God empowers me to be?
Yeah, that's good.
Hey, Jim and Jen, I want to ask you this question.
Speak to that couple right now who's really struggling.
I can't imagine how I would get to 31 or 49 years.
What would you say to that couple?
I think too many times if you just keep thinking about the negative things, the things that drive you crazy, then your whole mindset is gonna be negative.
But if you can remember the positive things and just really focus on those, but I always go back to prayer to be in man, you just gotta surrender it to the Lord and pour out your heart to the Lord and give that spouse over to the Lord and God can change hearts.
So I just, I really believe that.
I think early in our marriage we thought because of our faith that
Divorce would never happen to us.
That just wasn't anything that could ever happen.
And after a while, and having some of our good friends and that were strong believers and had faith, too, and their marriages were falling apart, we realized we're not immune.
We have to work at this and keep working at it.
It's not just going to happen naturally.
What advice would you give your newlywed selves to believe what research shows that
The three main areas of possible disagreement in a marriage, communication, money, and sex, be open in talking about those three areas and striving to see what God's perspective is.
I would say, honestly, true confession.
In my early years of our marriage, I'm recovering workaholic.
I mean, I put so much time and energy into what I was doing outside the home, and I have regret for that.
And yet,
you know, slowly but surely dialed that in and I'm so thankful that it wasn't too far into our marriage where this became the number one priority after our relationship with God.
And all the more you have to prioritize and continue to date.
Date when you don't have kids, date while you have kids, date after your kids are out of the house.
That's so critical.
Thank you guys for your wisdom and your time in this.
My prayer is for our church that their marriages
would endure, and that they would have a marriage of being able to look back, because what a testimony it is.
Your guys just have a great reputation for your marriage, and it's because, man, we all want that.
We all want to be able to say, we've been married for 49 years.
We've been married for 31 years.
Look at what God has done.
I'm just so thankful for you guys and how you have prioritized your marriage, and thanks for your wisdom today.
That's what I want to do right now.
I want to pray over the marriages in our church.
And so if you're sitting next to your spouse and you feel comfortable doing that, maybe just a moment to hold hands during this prayer.
And just to say, Hey, you and me, let's go to the long haul.
Let's pray together.
Lord, I thank you for every marriage.
Thank you for our parents' marriage and our grandparents' marriages that have pointed us to you.
And God, I pray that for every marriage in this room.
even in difficult times, even in frustrating times, even in times when we don't feel loved or understood.
Lord, would you give us your love and fill us with your hope?
I pray over every marriage in this room, God, that you would strengthen it, that you would protect it, that we would prioritize it, God, and that we would experience the blessing that comes when you said that
A man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife that we would experience the blessing of oneness and that our kids would see that and our grandchildren would see that.
God, would you use our marriage to start a legacy for our family?
God, I thank you that you loved us first and you pursued us first.
Pray all these things in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Have a great weekend everyone.
We'll see you next week.